docs/docs/docs/developer-resources/testing/platform-tests.md, before:

---
id: platform-tests
title: Testing - Platform Tests
slug: /developer-resources/testing/platform-tests
sidebar_position: 17
---

# Platform Tests

Platform tests validate the core plugin infrastructure and tooling.

## Test Location

All platform tests are in `test/platform/`:

```
test/platform/
├── manifestValidation.test.ts  # Manifest schema validation
├── generator.test.ts           # Plugin scaffolding tests
└── packaging.test.ts           # Packaging & zip creation tests
```

## Running Platform Tests

```bash
# Run all platform tests
pnpm test test/platform

# Run specific platform test
pnpm test test/platform/manifestValidation.test.ts
```

## Manifest Validation Tests

Tests in `manifestValidation.test.ts` validate plugin manifest files.

### What's Tested

- **Core Schema**: Required fields (name, pluginId, version, description, author)
- **Format Validation**: pluginId format, semantic versioning
- **Extension Points**: Structure and types of extension points
- **Real Manifests**: Validates actual plugin manifests (Razorpay, Plugin Map)

### Example Test

```typescript
it('should validate Razorpay admin manifest', () => {
  const manifest = JSON.parse(readFileSync(manifestPath, 'utf-8'));
  
  const result = validateManifest(manifest);
  expect(result.valid).toBe(true);
  expect(result.errors).toHaveLength(0);
});
```

## Generator Tests

Tests in `generator.test.ts` validate plugin scaffolding creation.

### What's Tested

- **Admin module creation**: Verifies all admin plugin files are created
- **API module creation**: Verifies all API plugin files are created
- **File structure**: Checks nested directories and files
- **Cleanup**: Ensures temporary directories are removed

### Example Test Structure

```typescript
it('should create admin module structure', () => {
  const tempDir = mkdtempSync(join(tmpdir(), 'plugin-test-'));
  
  try {
    createAdminSkeleton('TestPlugin', tempDir);
    
    expect(existsSync(join(tempDir, 'TestPlugin/admin/index.tsx'))).toBe(true);
    expect(existsSync(join(tempDir, 'TestPlugin/admin/manifest.json'))).toBe(true);
  } finally {
    rmSync(tempDir, { recursive: true, force: true });
  }
});
```

## Packaging Tests

Tests in `packaging.test.ts` validate plugin packaging and zip creation.

### What's Tested

- **Development builds**: Creates and validates dev zips
- **Production builds**: Creates and validates prod zips  
- **Manifest inclusion**: Verifies manifests are in zip
- **Zip integrity**: Tests zip file validity and structure
- **File filtering**: Ensures junk files are excluded

### Key Testing Patterns

```typescript
it('should create development build zip', () => {
  const zipPath = join(tempTestDir, 'test-plugin-dev.zip');
  createZip('test-plugin', tempTestDir, { production: false });
  
  expect(existsSync(zipPath)).toBe(true);
  expect(statSync(zipPath).size).toBeGreaterThan(0);
});
```

## Coverage Standards

Platform tests should maintain **80%+ coverage** as they form the foundation for all plugin testing.

Current stats: Run `pnpm test:coverage test/platform` to see latest coverage.

## Adding New Platform Tests

When adding platform functionality:

1. Create test file in `test/platform/`
2. Follow naming convention: `[feature].test.ts`
3. Test both success and failure cases
4. Clean up temporary files/directories
5. Update this documentation

## Next Steps

- Read [Setup Guide](setup) for test configuration details
- Read [Getting Started](getting-started) for basic test patterns

Commit message:

feat: enhance platform tests and documentation
- Added input validation to generator scripts

- Added error handling tests for generators and packaging

- Refined testing documentation structure and content

- Fixed API development guide title

docs/docs/docs/developer-resources/testing/platform-tests.md, after:

---
id: platform-tests
title: Platform Tests
slug: /developer-resources/testing/platform-tests
sidebar_position: 18
---

Platform tests validate the core plugin infrastructure and tooling.

## Test Location

All platform tests are in `test/platform/`:

```
test/platform/
├── manifestValidation.test.ts  # Manifest schema validation
├── generator.test.ts           # Plugin scaffolding tests
└── packaging.test.ts           # Packaging & zip creation tests
```

## Running Platform Tests

Platform tests can be run individually or as a suite. Use the commands below to execute tests and verify that all platform infrastructure is working correctly.

```bash
# Run all platform tests
pnpm test test/platform

# Run specific platform test
pnpm test test/platform/manifestValidation.test.ts
```

## Manifest Validation Tests

Tests in `manifestValidation.test.ts` validate plugin manifest files.

### What's Tested

- **Core Schema**: Required fields (name, pluginId, version, description, author)
- **Format Validation**: pluginId format, semantic versioning
- **Extension Points**: Structure and types of extension points
- **Real Manifests**: Validates actual plugin manifests (Razorpay, Plugin Map)

### Example Test

These tests verify that plugin manifest files conform to the required schema. They read actual manifest files from existing plugins and validate field types, required properties, and format constraints.

```typescript
it('should validate Razorpay admin manifest', () => {
  const manifest = JSON.parse(readFileSync(manifestPath, 'utf-8'));
  
  const result = validateManifest(manifest);
  expect(result.valid).toBe(true);
  expect(result.errors).toHaveLength(0);
});
```

## Generator Tests

Tests in `generator.test.ts` validate plugin scaffolding creation.

### What's Tested

- **Admin module creation**: Verifies all admin plugin files are created
- **API module creation**: Verifies all API plugin files are created
- **File structure**: Checks nested directories and files
- **Input Validation**: Verifies plugin name validation
- **Error Handling**: Verifies filesystem error handling
- **Cleanup**: Ensures temporary directories are removed

### Example Test Structure

Platform tests follow a consistent pattern using Vitest's `beforeEach` and `afterEach` hooks to set up isolated test environments. Each test creates its own temporary directory to avoid interference between tests.

```typescript
it('should create admin module structure', () => {
  const tempDir = mkdtempSync(join(tmpdir(), 'plugin-test-'));
  
  try {
    createAdminSkeleton('TestPlugin', tempDir);
    
    expect(existsSync(join(tempDir, 'TestPlugin/admin/index.tsx'))).toBe(true);
    expect(existsSync(join(tempDir, 'TestPlugin/admin/manifest.json'))).toBe(true);
  } finally {
    rmSync(tempDir, { recursive: true, force: true });
  }
});
```

## Packaging Tests

Tests in `packaging.test.ts` validate plugin packaging and zip creation.

### What's Tested

- **Development builds**: Creates and validates dev zips
- **Production builds**: Creates and validates prod zips  
- **Manifest inclusion**: Verifies manifests are in zip
- **Zip integrity**: Tests zip file validity and structure
- **File filtering**: Ensures junk files are excluded

### Key Testing Patterns

Packaging tests ensure that plugins are correctly bundled into distributable zip files. They verify file inclusion, exclusion rules (e.g., ignoring `.DS_Store`), zip integrity, and proper directory structure preservation.

```typescript
it('should create development build zip', () => {
  const zipPath = join(tempTestDir, 'test-plugin-dev.zip');
  createZip('test-plugin', tempTestDir, { production: false });
  
  expect(existsSync(zipPath)).toBe(true);
  expect(statSync(zipPath).size).toBeGreaterThan(0);
});
```

## Coverage Standards

Platform tests should maintain **80%+ coverage** as they form the foundation for all plugin testing.

Current stats: Run `pnpm test:coverage test/platform` to see latest coverage.

## Adding New Platform Tests

When adding platform functionality:

1. Create test file in `test/platform/`
2. Follow naming convention: `[feature].test.ts`
3. Test both success and failure cases
4. Clean up temporary files/directories
5. Update this documentation

## Next Steps

- Read [Setup Guide](setup) for test configuration details
- Read [Getting Started](getting-started) for basic test patterns
