README.md, before:

# Talawa Plugin

💬 Join the community on Slack from our [Palisadoes Foundation GitHub Home Page](https://github.com/PalisadoesFoundation)

[![N|Solid](docs/static/img/markdown/misc/talawa-logo-lite-200x200.png)](https://github.com/PalisadoesFoundation/talawa-plugin)

[![License: GPL v3](https://img.shields.io/badge/License-GPLv3-blue.svg)](https://www.gnu.org/licenses/gpl-3.0)
[![GitHub stars](https://img.shields.io/github/stars/PalisadoesFoundation/talawa-plugin.svg?style=social&label=Star&maxAge=2592000)](https://github.com/PalisadoesFoundation/talawa-plugin)
[![GitHub forks](https://img.shields.io/github/forks/PalisadoesFoundation/talawa-plugin.svg?style=social&label=Fork&maxAge=2592000)](https://github.com/PalisadoesFoundation/talawa-plugin)
[![codecov](https://codecov.io/gh/PalisadoesFoundation/talawa-plugin/graph/badge.svg?token=TBEVUL2UBJ)](https://codecov.io/gh/PalisadoesFoundation/talawa-plugin)
[![Formatted with Biome](https://img.shields.io/badge/Formatted_with-Biome-60a5fa?style=flat&logo=biome)](https://biomejs.dev/)
[![Linted with Biome](https://img.shields.io/badge/Linted_with-Biome-60a5fa?style=flat&logo=biome)](https://biomejs.dev)

Talawa Plugin is the official plugin architecture for extending the features of the Talawa platform across its API, Admin, and Mobile components. Built on a microkernel-based system, it allows developers to easily integrate new functionality without modifying core Talawa codebases.

## Table of Contents

<!-- toc -->

- [Talawa Components](#talawa-components)
- [Documentation](#documentation)
  - [Videos](#videos)

<!-- tocstop -->

## Talawa Components

1. **talawa**: [A mobile application with social media features](https://github.com/PalisadoesFoundation/talawa)
1. **talawa-api**: [An API providing access to user data and features](https://github.com/PalisadoesFoundation/talawa-api)
1. **talawa-admin**: [A web based administrative portal](https://github.com/PalisadoesFoundation/talawa-admin)
1. **talawa-plugins**: This repository – microkernel-based drop-in plugins
1. **talawa-docs**: [The online documentation website](https://github.com/PalisadoesFoundation/talawa-docs)

# Documentation

1. Install instructions will be available in [INSTALLATION.md](INSTALLATION.md).
1. To contribute, review [CONTRIBUTING.md](CONTRIBUTING.md) and related guidelines:
   - [CODE_OF_CONDUCT.md](CODE_OF_CONDUCT.md)
   - [ISSUE_GUIDELINES.md](ISSUE_GUIDELINES.md)
   - [PR_GUIDELINES.md](PR_GUIDELINES.md)
1. Plugin developer documentation will be deployed to [docs.talawa.io](https://docs.talawa.io) under the **Plugin** section.

## Videos

1. Refer to our [YouTube Playlists](https://www.youtube.com/@PalisadoesOrganization/playlists)
   - Start with: [Getting Started – Developers](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=YpBUoHxEeyg&list=PLv50qHwThlJUIzscg9a80a9-HmAlmUdCF&index=1)

Commit message:

Change Slack link to community forum link
Updated community engagement link in README.

README.md, after:

# Talawa Plugin

💬 Join our [community forum](https://community.talawa.io/) to meet others using and improving Talawa!

[![N|Solid](docs/static/img/markdown/misc/talawa-logo-lite-200x200.png)](https://github.com/PalisadoesFoundation/talawa-plugin)

[![License: GPL v3](https://img.shields.io/badge/License-GPLv3-blue.svg)](https://www.gnu.org/licenses/gpl-3.0)
[![GitHub stars](https://img.shields.io/github/stars/PalisadoesFoundation/talawa-plugin.svg?style=social&label=Star&maxAge=2592000)](https://github.com/PalisadoesFoundation/talawa-plugin)
[![GitHub forks](https://img.shields.io/github/forks/PalisadoesFoundation/talawa-plugin.svg?style=social&label=Fork&maxAge=2592000)](https://github.com/PalisadoesFoundation/talawa-plugin)
[![codecov](https://codecov.io/gh/PalisadoesFoundation/talawa-plugin/graph/badge.svg?token=TBEVUL2UBJ)](https://codecov.io/gh/PalisadoesFoundation/talawa-plugin)
[![Formatted with Biome](https://img.shields.io/badge/Formatted_with-Biome-60a5fa?style=flat&logo=biome)](https://biomejs.dev/)
[![Linted with Biome](https://img.shields.io/badge/Linted_with-Biome-60a5fa?style=flat&logo=biome)](https://biomejs.dev)

Talawa Plugin is the official plugin architecture for extending the features of the Talawa platform across its API, Admin, and Mobile components. Built on a microkernel-based system, it allows developers to easily integrate new functionality without modifying core Talawa codebases.

## Table of Contents

<!-- toc -->

- [Talawa Components](#talawa-components)
- [Documentation](#documentation)
  - [Videos](#videos)

<!-- tocstop -->

## Talawa Components

1. **talawa**: [A mobile application with social media features](https://github.com/PalisadoesFoundation/talawa)
1. **talawa-api**: [An API providing access to user data and features](https://github.com/PalisadoesFoundation/talawa-api)
1. **talawa-admin**: [A web based administrative portal](https://github.com/PalisadoesFoundation/talawa-admin)
1. **talawa-plugins**: This repository – microkernel-based drop-in plugins
1. **talawa-docs**: [The online documentation website](https://github.com/PalisadoesFoundation/talawa-docs)

# Documentation

1. Install instructions will be available in [INSTALLATION.md](INSTALLATION.md).
1. To contribute, review [CONTRIBUTING.md](CONTRIBUTING.md) and related guidelines:
   - [CODE_OF_CONDUCT.md](CODE_OF_CONDUCT.md)
   - [ISSUE_GUIDELINES.md](ISSUE_GUIDELINES.md)
   - [PR_GUIDELINES.md](PR_GUIDELINES.md)
1. Plugin developer documentation will be deployed to [docs.talawa.io](https://docs.talawa.io) under the **Plugin** section.

## Videos

1. Refer to our [YouTube Playlists](https://www.youtube.com/@PalisadoesOrganization/playlists)
   - Start with: [Getting Started – Developers](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=YpBUoHxEeyg&list=PLv50qHwThlJUIzscg9a80a9-HmAlmUdCF&index=1)
